## Long Question and their answer
---
**Q:1 What is the’ Metrological disturbance in the atmosphere of art criticism’ That Tagore refers to?**

**Ans:** In Tagore’s view, the western analytical approach to art has disturbed the clear sky of Indian art criticism. He uses the metaphor of the’ Metrological disturbance in the atmosphere’ for it. The direct, spiritual understanding of art, as an expression of the soul, has been the basic Indian approach to art. This approach has got obscured by the negative, confusing impact of western intellectualised and utilitarian approaches to art criticism. Now even in India people have developed attendance y to subject art to intellectual scrutiny, asking for its usefulness or purpose rather than accepting art as an expression of overflowing emotions and personality. Tagore argues that this approach” Judges the excellence of the river.... By the point of view of a canal”- Meaning that the vast flowing creative force of true hour is being judged by narrow, and rigid standards. The intellectual and utilitarian approach turns the free spontaneous overflow of thoughts and emotions into a product- something functional economic or intellectually justified. Tagore thus uses metrological imagery to show that, like a storm, the western critical approach is external and disruptive. It clouds the reality of the nature and function of art. He calls for a return to viewing art as an expression of the core of human personality which is beyond any logical understanding. 

---

**Q:2 What differences does Tagore chart out between animal and man?** 

**Ans:** Man and animal are different in some essential aspects. Animals remain at the physical level. They are very nearly bound within the limits of their necessities. Most of their activities are geared towards self preservation and the preservation of the race. With their limited knowledge they watch their surroundings in order to be able to take shelter and seek their food. Most of them build their own dwellings. They judge the indications of the season to be able to get ready to adapt themselves to the changes. In all these aspects, man is like any animal. He has to be careful for self- preservation and the preservation of the race. He cannot help but strive for food and shelter not only for himself but also for his family and others who matters to him. But man is also unlike the animal. He goes beyond the physical level. There is a vast access of wealth in man's life which gives him the freedom to be useless and irresponsible to a great extent. This wealth is surplus of feelings and emotions. It is only in man's domain to proudly assert that knowledge is for the sake of knowledge. He has the free enjoyment of it. He uses knowledge to build civilizations. The animal has a certain amount of altruism- the altruism of parenthood, the herd and the hive. The altruism is essential for race preservation. But in man there is a good deal more than it. He goes far beyond his limits. He has to be good because goodness is necessary for the group. His goodness can be for the sake of goodness. He can be heroic for bravery’s sake. He can go against all policies and new ethics. Animals give expression to feelings of pleasure, displeasure, fear, anger and love. In animals these emotional expressions have gone little beyond their bounds of usefulness. But in man, emotions still have their roots in their original purpose, they have gone far and wide in nature. Man has a fund of emotional energy which is not all occupied with self-preservation. It is this surplus of emotional energy in man that seeks its outlet in the creation of art.

---

**Q:3 Discuss Tagore’s Views on the true function of art. Are his views in consonance with the traditional definition of art? Why or why not? **

**Ans:** According to Tagore, the true function of art is to express the’ surplus’ of human emotion and personality. Art is a medium through which the artist’s inner, subjective self is revealed. The object of the true art is to bridge the gap between the individual soul and that of the universe, highlighting man’s communion with nature. Tagore opines that art does not imitate external reality as some traditional thinkers like Plato and Aristotle look upon art. Art is not mimesis or imitation of external reality. It goes far beyond the external. It seeks the inner reality, "the soul of things.” The object of art is the expression of personality and not that which is abstract and analytical. That is why, art necessarily uses the language of imagery and music. It does not deal with ideas as ideas. If ideas are to enter into art, they must come under the disguise of personification. That is why poetry uses concrete words that have vital qualities. According to Tagore, the ultimate purpose of art is to offer joy and a sense of liberation, rather than practical utility. Art exists for its own sake. To bind it in limitations of purpose is to limit it. Tagore Also views art as the mirror of the soul. He rejects the traditional idea that it is only for decoration or instruction. In other words, he advocates 'Art for art’s sake’ and is opposed to ‘Art for life’s sake’. 

---

**Q:4 what does Tagore Say about the effect of the abstractions like the nation, religion and race on man and his personality?** 

Ans:- Tagore looks upon terms like nation, religion and race as abstractions which conspire to hide the true man and blur the truth. The idea of society has created endless forms of slavery. We tolerate these forms simply because it has killed our consciousness of the reality of the personal man. The personal man in each of us has his own likes and dislikes and wants to find something to fulfill his need of love. Tagore feels that religion as practised by man is equally degrading. In the name of religion such deeds have been committed that would exhaust all the resources of hell itself for punishment. History is repleted with cruelties inflicted by so-called religious followers on those whom they viewed irreligious. The term nation has also negative impact on man and his personality. The idea of the nation is responsible for Horrific crimes. It has blurred the reality of brotherhood of man. Blind and nationalism has led to bloody wars, indiscriminate killings, terrorist acts, and what not. The need of man gets distorted when the irrational love for one’s nation gets the upper hand. Tagore is thus clear that abstractions like society, religion and nation have played only a negative role. Everywhere in this world the ’Supreme Person’ Is suffering from the killing of human reality by the invention of the abstract.

---

**Q:5 Why does Tagore opine that religion in India is personal? **

**Ans:** Tagore Opines that religion in India is personal. It is so because for us religion and God are not distinct and impersonal. They belong to our homes as well as to our temples. We feel God's presence in all the human relationship of love and affection, and in our festivities. That is why, religion is intertwined in our daily life. We find God in the woman who is good, in the man who is true. Our religious songs are our love songs. Q:6, What, within man, asserts aids immortality despite sterling at the inevitability of death? Ans:- There is no doubt that death is inevitable . Every living human has to die one day. And yet within each individual is the deeper unity,, the ultimate mystery which from the centre of his/her World radiate stores its circumference(the outer world). This is something mysterious is the consciousness of the infinite which asserts its immortality in artistic expressions. It is in our body, it is in our mind and yet grows beyond our mind.